Add 3rd pilot design history post (#228)
NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history: app/posts/screening-invite/2025/09/2025-08-13-invite-breast-screening-pilot-user-research.md

---
title: Researching the impact of piloting digital-first invitations in breast screening
description: Content and interaction design work for the 2024 breast screening invitations Pilot.
date: 2025-09-04
---
Team Invite is working on inviting people to breast screening appointments using a digital-first communication strategy.  

> In our first post, [we gave a high-level overview of the pilot work](https://design-history.prevention-services.nhs.uk/screening-invite/2025/06/invite-pilot-overview/). In the second one, [we deep dived into content and interaction design iterations](https://design-history.prevention-services.nhs.uk/screening-invite/2025/08/invite-breast-screening-pilot-design-iterations/). In this one we have summarised what we found out during the pilot phase about user experience and operational impact. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our first post, we gave an [overview of the pilot work](https://design-history.prevention-services.nhs.uk/screening-invite/2025/06/invite-pilot-overview/). In the second post, we looked at [content and interaction design iterations](https://design-history.prevention-services.nhs.uk/screening-invite/2025/08/invite-breast-screening-pilot-design-iterations/). In this one we summarise what we found out during the pilot phase about user experience and operational impact. 
```

## What we wanted to find out in the pilot

> At a high level we were keen to understand why messages in different channels might be read and whether they impact attendance and overall experience.

Reviewer: I'm not sure "why messages might be read" makes sense here?

Author: At a high level we were keen to understand why someone might read a message in one channel rather than another, and whether receiving messages through different channels impacts attendance and overall experience.

Some of the details we wanted to learn included:
*	would not sending a map have an impact?
*	would participants go back to their invite on their phone?
*	would participants see the guidance link in the digital message?
*	how might breast screening offices be impacted?

## The user research methods we used

> It’s hard to catch that moment when someone receives a message. You can’t observe someone indefinitely and we didn’t have the data agreements in place to call people.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We didn't have a way to observe people receiving messages, or call them directly about receiving their invites.
```

Instead, we started with some content and usability testing of the NHS App invitation to try and get some sense of how they’d respond to it.

Then for the pilot itself we did at least have the data that told us who received which message and when.

> Using this and then some significant help from the breast screening offices themselves, we managed to intercept the participants that we sent messages to, either at the end of their appointment or on the phone if they called. Breast screening offices also called anyone who didn’t attend their appointment.

Reviewer: I wonder if this could be bullets of what you did, that follows-on from the line above.

Instead we began by testing NHS App invitations in moderated sessions, to see how people responded.

During the pilot we:
- tracked who got which message and when
- asked screening staff helped us speak to people – either after their appointments or when they called in
- asked screening staff to call people who didn't attend

## Pilot participants

We sent messages to 150 people across 3 breast screening offices. We chose specific people who were statistically most likely to:
*	attend their appointment
*	be knowledgeable of the screening process
*	have the fewest barriers to attending their appointment

> This was to ensure any issues we encountered were more to do with the change in invitation process, rather than issues with other aspects of the wider screening process. The number was set at 150 as it was seen as an easier number to track.

Reviewer: the first sentence could be simpler:

"This was so any issues we encountered were easy to attribute to the change in invitation channel."

The second sentence doesn't make a lot of sense. Easier to track than a bigger number? But I assume 150 was also seen as big enough sample size?

Author: This is because the tracking would require manual effort for any follow-ups so 50 people per site was seen as a manageable amount. I'll change the wording to 'an easy number of participants to track'.

## What this user research is missing

### Significant quantitative data 

> We can report that it was mainly SMS messages that participants saw, while just under a third of the sample read their NHS App messages and a few people received letters. You can see how each type of message was sent in sequence in [our earlier post on this.](https://screening-de-breast-scr-rui5fn.herokuapp.com/screening-invite/2025/06/invite-pilot-overview/#proposed-changes-to-how-people-are-invited-to-screening)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most users saw the SMS messages. Just under a third of the sample read their NHS App messages and a few people received letters. You can see [how each type of message was sent in sequence in our earlier post on this](https://screening-de-breast-scr-rui5fn.herokuapp.com/screening-invite/2025/06/invite-pilot-overview/#proposed-changes-to-how-people-are-invited-to-screening).
```

> However, the sample size of 150 isn’t large or varied enough to give us high levels of confidence for whether these numbers in the pilot would be the same if we rolled out for the whole breast screening population of around 6 million people. This research tells us *why* certain things might happen, not how often they might happen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the sample size of 150 isn’t large or varied enough to give us high levels of confidence for whether these numbers in the pilot would be the same if we rolled out for the whole breast screening population of around 6 million people. This research tells us why certain things might happen, not how often they might happen.
```

### An understanding of how this would impact underserved groups

> The sample for this pilot deliberately chose people with the least barriers to accessing their screening appointment. A high priority for any future research would be to learn how digital first messaging would impact underserved groups who might struggle to access it the most, such as people with lower levels of digital capability or access. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sample for this pilot deliberately chose people with the least barriers to accessing their screening appointment. A high priority for future research is to learn how digital first messaging would impact underserved groups who might struggle to access it the most, such as people with lower levels of digital capability or access. 
```

## Noticing and reading messages

Key findings were: 

1) **People noticed their messages because our fallback system found the places they tend to check** 
This was clear as we asked participants if they received their invitation in a channel they usually check – the majority said yes.

>     This is of course the purpose of the fallback system, to try digital messages first and use other channels when digital messages aren’t accessed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is of course the purpose of the fallback system, to try digital messages first and use other channels when digital messages aren’t accessed.
```

>     In this sample, concerns around not having read receipts for SMS messages were mitigated by participants being experienced in receiving SMS messages for healthcare communications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this sample, concerns around not having read receipts for SMS messages were mitigated by participants being experienced in receiving SMS messages for healthcare communications.
```

2) **Messages can be noticed even when sent via a new channel**
Even when participants received a message in a channel they don’t normally use, most of them still noticed it and attended their appointment.

>     This is something to keep in mind as we roll out and potentially hear more concerns from people who are used to receiving letters. While people’s attitude may be one of concern, their behaviour can still mean they access messages and attend appointments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is something to keep in mind as we roll out and potentially hear more concerns from people who are used to receiving letters. While people’s attitude may be one of concern, their behaviour can still mean they access messages and attend appointments.
```

3) **Messages can be effective even when people’s perception or memory of them is inaccurate**
Many of the participants in this sample did not accurately recall the type of invitation they received. Some claimed they received an email, when we didn’t send any.

>     This is because it can be hard to keep track of which healthcare message is for which appointment, or distinguish between different types of notification on your phone. Also people were sent SMS reminders, which can be confused with the original invitation​.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because it can be hard to keep track of which healthcare message is for which appointment, or distinguish between different types of notification on your phone. Also people were sent SMS reminders, which can be confused with the original invitation​.
```

    Despite this, the key point is that most people still saw their message and attended their appointment, and many were ultimately     indifferent on what type of message they received. If people are indifferent, this could make it easier to change the type of digital channel we use to send messages.

4) **Most of the sample didn’t follow a link to further guidance as they didn’t need to**
Each message had a link (or a QR code for the letter) to a gov.uk publication page. Most people in this sample didn’t follow the link because they had gone through the process before and the key information was quickly available in the message.

> ## Attending appointments and remembering where they are

Reviewer: Attending appointments and finding them

We’ve found out that:

1)	**The change to digital messages can impact the people who use their letter as a reminder**
 Two people said they forgot about their appointment because they didn’t have a letter, with one of them saying they need letters because they have memory loss issues.

>     Letters can have the advantage of being easily visible as you put them on fridges or other places at home. For some, messages on a phone can be harder to remember in comparison and we have previously seen there can be issues relocating an NHS App message in our pre-pilot user research.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Letters have the advantage of being easily visible. Users put them on fridges or other places at home. Messages on a phone can be harder to remember. In previous research we saw people have issues relocating  NHS App messages.
```

2)	**Letters do not need to act as reminders to people with strong calendar habits**
Most of this sample added their appointment to either a physical or digital calendar. This suggests there could be a health inequality issue to consider here. 

>     Our fallback system could work for those who are able to set up reminders themselves, but not for people who are less able to do this due to things like learning difficulties or digital capability and would benefit from a letter instead of an SMS. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our fallback system could work for those who are able to set up reminders themselves, but not for people who are less able would benefit from letters instead of SMS.
```

>     From this sample, we cannot see the size of this potential issue due to a small sample size and it only containing people without 'special appointment' requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We cannot see the size of this potential issue due to a small sample size and it only containing people without 'special appointment' requirements.
```

> 3)	**Late letters due to postal issues can also cause appointment problems**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3)	**Late letters due to postal issues cause appointment problems**
```

A participant had to reschedule their appointment due to not receiving their letter in time, despite the letter being sent 3 weeks in advance (over the Christmas period).

## Getting to appointments without being sent a map

> Knowing the area or local landmarks can mean a map isn't needed for finding the main hospital or screening location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Knowing the area or local landmarks can mean a map isn't necessary for finding the main hospital or screening location.
```

In Dorset the screening took place in Beales Department Store – a known location to almost the entire sample. The invitation and text reminder told people Beales was the location and most people reported they didn't need a map since they already knew where Beales was.

> It's also worth noting that if just the address was shared, it would have only said '64-68, Dolphin Centre’ in the first line, showing it could be worth investigating whether sharing only addresses is always the best way to direct people.

Reviewer: "if just" – should that be "in cases where only"

also "provided" not "shared"

However, maps are often needed to navigate large hospital sites for example, from the car park or main entrance to the exact screening area. In South West London some people phoned to ask for directions to the exact building where the screening would take place. In this case, an address was shared for the hospital, but it still wasn't clear to all which part of the hospital to go to.

## The potential impact on breast screening offices

The breast screening offices in the pilot received very few calls that were related to issues with digital messages. This could be because this pilot only involved a small number of people who had been to appointments before, so the impact on breast screening offices will need to be monitored if we invite groups who might need more support.

## Next steps

Following the pilot, the invite team has been:
*	refining the content and design of invitations, based on the pilot feedback
*	exploring ways to help people reach their appointments without relying on a map

> *	preparing to scale by automating manual BSO processes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*	preparing to scale by automating manual Breast screening office processes
```

Also – this could maybe do with an example?
